the topic that I'd like to talk about
today is what does it take to raise
capital in SAS in 2023
given the massive downturn that started
about 18 months ago it's a topic that a
lot of SAS Founders are understandably
very nervous about
I definitely don't have all of the all
of the answers but hopefully a few
answers to that question and maybe at
least some food for thought
a little bit of a background to this in
2016 I tried to answer this question I
did some research we talked to a couple
of investors from our Network
um we then put the results onto the
proverbial back of a napkin and the rest
is
history and if you miss that part of
History like it turned into this
physical napkin here
this is from I think 2018 so this is
maybe no longer that useful
um we did this research every year since
then
and we're now in the process of
um creating the 2023 version of the
napkin and I'll give you a little sneak
preview as part of this presentation
I will run through the data on
valuations and round sizes and all of
this pretty quickly because you can read
this when we publish it online and there
is also a lot of good research and
reports out there from companies like
Carta deal room and and others
um so what I think is probably more
interesting is to spend a bit more time
on some of the qualitative answers that
we got from investors and some of the
implications which those have for
Founders that are trying to raise around
in 2023
before we did the survey this year my
expectation was that the napkin could
look a bit like this this year meaning
that if you're in AI everybody wants to
give you money at a any evaluation and
if you're not an AI then well probably
difficult
um I think there is something to that
but the actual results definitely have a
bit more nuance
so
let's at the very as the first step here
let's take a quick look at the overall
investment activity this is data from
Carter on the number of seed and series
a rounds and the total amount invested
at these stages you might have seen this
before it's available online
um and as you probably all know there
has been a massive shift and in the over
the last 18 months to two years the
number of rounds and the amount of
capital raised
um is down by 50 to 70 or so
I think the good news and it's always
really important to keep that in mind is
that we're still approximately at the
2019 levels so what happened is mostly
that some of the craziness from 2020 and
2021 has been erased
um but we're not yet back to like the
nuclear winter of fundraising that we
had in maybe 2008 or 2001 so I think
that is important to put that a bit into
that perspective
if we look at series B's and series C's
it's kind of similar
um valuations no sorry the number of
rounds will come back to valuations in a
second the the number of rounds and the
amount of capital is down 50 to 75 from
the peak depending on what you're
looking at
um but again it's not much worse than it
was in 2019 and I think in 2019 it was
okay
so it's maybe not that bad
now here we're starting to look at the
data that we got to our from our survey
and each of these blue bars is one data
point it represents One financing Round
Here starting with precede
um we also what you can also see here is
the the median well round size and
valuation as well as the median round
size and valuation from car time Carter
you probably know probably a lot of you
manage their cap tables using Carta and
they have a very large data set from us
only companies though so that's why
because we also include some European uh
financing rounds that's why we're
showing all of this here as you can see
there is a very large range
um but if you look at where most of
these data points are and if you take a
look at the median you can see that most
precede around sizes were around one to
one and a half million and valuations
were very roughly at five to ten million
obviously there is always a lot of
variation to that
moving on to the seat stage you can see
that most seat rounds were very roughly
in the four to five million range at
around 10 to 20 million pre
and now for the seed stage we also asked
if the investors how much ARR did the
company have at the time this is not
really relevant at precede because
companies typically don't have Revenue
at the precede stage but at the seat
stage as you can see here approximately
half of them were pre-revenue while the
other half had some AR anything between
just a couple of hundred thousand
dollars
to about a million or even 1.5 million
um there's also some information on the
growth rates but it's not that relevant
because there aren't that many companies
who already can look back 12 months to
any significant Revenue by the time they
rise raise their seed round
here's the data for series a companies
you can see that most of the rounds were
in the 5 to 15 million range so
again that's a big range and maybe
because of that it's it's not that
helpful
um valuations were mostly roughly in the
20 to 60 million range and again that's
a it's a very broad picture
I think this is interesting when we try
to get more information about the level
of ARR that these companies had and
unfortunately we haven't found a data
source for this like Carta and other
data providers don't don't have this
data as far as we know
um so this relies only on our own
research
um and as you can see here is that most
companies when they raise their series a
were at around one to five million ARR
which might be a bit more than you'd
expect and also is a bit more than we
what we saw in previous years
um and I think this is one of the one of
the takeaways that
um investors have become more picky in
this market and therefore they
um tend to wait a bit everything is a
bit slower and so the companies tend to
have a bit more AR by the time they
raise their series A
interestingly when you look at the
growth rates you can see that more than
half of those companies were growing at
more than 2x but there is also a
significant number of companies that was
growing at less than 2x so this might
also be a function of the Slowdown and
the fact that series a has happened a
little bit later so
um the number of data points is somewhat
limited but I think it's a reasonable
takeaway to assume that in comparison to
two years ago the series a is happening
at a slightly later stage slightly more
AR and slightly
um lower growth rates what that means of
course as well like if you keep in mind
that the valuations haven't changed that
much at the series a is that the
multiples have have compressed so you
have somewhat higher levels than they
are a relatively similar evaluations in
absolute terms so evaluations have
definitely come down and a little bit
um last but not least for this part of
the presentation
um if we look at the series B's and we
don't have a lot of data points here but
we've also again included the data from
from Carter
um you can see that most of the series B
rounds were very roughly in the 10 to 40
million range and valuations were again
very roughly
um between 80 to 200.
now looking at ARR levels at the series
B companies you can see that most
companies were around 6 to 12 million in
ARR
um and interestingly more than half of
them were growing at less than 2x in in
previous years that proportion was
um lower so it's a bit similar to what
we saw previously for the series A's the
rounds tend to happen a little bit later
at a little bit more AR but with a
little bit less growth
um I think every almost every company
had to reduce their growth Targets in
the last couple of last one or two years
um the investors still get excited by
growth they they still want to see a lot
of growth to even consider
um an investment but it looks like the
expectations had to come come down at
least a little bit
now what we also asked and what I think
is maybe even more interesting than the
numbers is we that we asked investors
what really matters to you when you look
at a potential investment in 2023 and we
asked them to rate this to rate several
factors such as capital efficiency
evaluation AI strategy product Market
fit quality of the team Market size
growth rates and and several other
factors and we asked investors to tell
us if
these factors if they consider them more
important than previously or less
important or equally important
and what's very clear from this picture
is that almost everybody like more than
90 percent of the respondents told us
that Capital efficiency has become more
important than it was in previous years
also the vast majority of investors told
us that valuation has become more
important for them than previously and
half of them maybe not surprisingly also
told us that a convincing AIA strategy
has become more important than it than
it was previously
um maybe as an aside you can see that
there are a lot of things that investors
said have become more important but
there isn't that much that they told us
is less important so either that just
shows that investors are bad at
prioritization or that they have a
luxury to just ask for for more like I I
want growth but I also want Capital
efficiency so maybe that's just a a sign
of the market where the power has been
shifting a little bit towards the
investors
um now with all of this let's try to
take a look at how the next version of
our napkin might look like
um you can see this on your screens I'm
assuming
um and I I think the on the valuations
and round sizes there will be some
updates but it's not it's not that
material
um when it comes to ARR and growth rate
as I uh talked about there will be some
minor updates but I think really the the
clear takeaway the most important
difference to 2022 but even more so
actually to 2021 and previous years is
this immense focus on Capital efficiency
and that's why I'm gonna talk about this
a little bit more
um as as well as the
um AI strategy which for sure everybody
will ask you if you're trying to rise to
race around in 2023
so
um we'll do continue to do some more
work on this this napkin
um if if you'd like to get a copy of it
once it's done please feel free to send
me an email at Christoph 0.9.com you'll
also find me online and then we'll happy
to send you the real napkin once it's
done
now let's talk a bit about those three
factors which stood out as being the
most important things investors care
about this year
this whole topic about growth efficiency
and how to find the right balance
between growth and capital efficiency is
something I've been talking about a lot
over the last 18 to 24 months I did a
whole presentation specifically about
this here at saster a year ago so we we
can't cover all of this now but I try to
give you a few takeaways from that
presentation and you can see a few
slides here and I'm happy to answer any
questions later on or discuss that with
some of you after the after my talk
um so
up until 2020 2021 investors or the
market as a whole was really rewarding
growth almost at any cost and that has
drastically changed when the stock
markets
um went down and when like obviously
like the big macro
change started uh early in early of
early in last year
um investors Care Now much more about
healthy and sustainable growth and
because of that you need to pay
attention more to you need to pay more
attention to factors such as a bird
multiple or your CAC efficiency and
maybe the most important metric that you
need to keep an eye on is your burn
multiple I'm sure a lot of you have
already heard about that or read about
it or maybe use it to
um to manage your your company but just
in case it basically just tells you how
much do I have to raise in order to add
a dollar of net new AR so it gives you a
very holistic picture about the
efficiency of of your business and it's
generally considered that in the
relatively early stage let's say up to
25 million in AR hours so if you are if
your burn Multiple List 1 to 1.5 that's
that's good if it's even lower that's
great very early on it might be
significantly higher because you don't
you're not adding so much net new
Revenue yet but you already have costs
for your product product organization
and a lot of other upfront costs so
um it can be higher early on it can also
be higher when you've just raised around
and you're spending you're spending more
money to to build up your sales team so
um there is no one size fits-all answer
to what is an acceptable burn multiple
it depends on your Runway and many other
factors but it's important to keep it in
mind
um if you are in a situation where your
Runway is like dangerously short and you
think you're burned multiple is too high
in your trying to think about like where
where to save
um it's extremely important that you
look at other metrics such as your
payback period which measures how long
does it take to recoup a dollar invested
in the sales and marketing organization
because if you're marketing and sales
spend is quite efficient then you
probably don't want to cut there because
it might actually reduce your Runway
um because if let's say a dollar that
you invest in sales and and marketing uh
becomes a dollar of cash flow within six
months then you probably don't want to
cut that so
um this is why I came up with this
Matrix here where you see the calc
payback period on one axis and the burn
multiple on the other axis and depending
on where you find yourself
um on uh on on this chart there are
different implications
like if your sales and marketing spend
is inefficient then this is probably or
obviously the first area to cut but on
the other hand if your sales and
marketing spend is efficient then you
probably want to try to protect that and
find other ways to reduce costs in order
to
um increase your Runway
now the other Factor that really stood
out was valuation and that's probably no
surprise if you look at a chart like
this which shows that Bessemer emerging
Cloud index as you can see here although
there has been a recovery in the last
couple of months it's still down about
50 percent from the peak and that has a
more or less direct impact on the
valuations that pre-ipo investors are
willing to pay and then it trickles down
to Series E and series D and series C
and series B maybe it's less relevant at
seed and series a because I'm like the
rational for early stage investors is
somewhat different but it definitely has
a big impact on what on the logic of a
series b or a series C investor
um also if you're try to remember what
2020 and previous years looked like
there were so many unicorns so many deck
horns it looked like everything is going
through the roof and all of this
excitement and hype made in investors
pay very high valuations but
um if you look at the list of public SAS
companies today there aren't that many
companies that are still worth more than
5 billion so
um I think that has that has been quite
a
um reality check
um not so many companies will eventually
exit at several billion dollars or even
um or even even more than that and I
think that's that is something that
investors are starting to to factor in
more than they did that some years ago
now last but definitely not least
um expect to be asked about your AI
strategy
um if you're not a let's call it like an
AI a native startup but a SAS company
that's been around for a few years
um investors will ask you that question
and they might wonder if you're just
trying to sprinkle some AI on your
product or sprinkle some AI on your deck
because you know investors are going to
ask for it
um so I think you have to have a really
convincing strategy and and I can't tell
you what that is for your product or
your company without
discussing it in more detail is
obviously depends on a lot of factors
um but you'll I think you'll have to
show that you really understand what
your customers want and that you have an
idea and maybe some data on what
problems you can solve with AI and that
you can solve with AI better than
without AIA
um I think you have to think about how
deeply is AI integrated in your product
probably the deeper the better like
anything that is just a copy and paste
from jet TPT away is probably not that
valuable
you'll also be asked how are you going
to win against open Ai and some of the
other large foundational models
um but also about also how are you going
to win against the incumbents in your
space
um so far
um I think the learning is that the
bigger SAS companies are pretty fast to
embrace AI so it's not like they are the
dinosaurs from the on-premise world that
didn't manage to move to the cloud if
you look at what intercom HubSpot notion
zendes and others are doing they are
pretty pretty fast to
leverage this new or this relatively new
emerging technology
so you'll really have to think about
what's your what's your Edge given that
these big companies have the data and
the customers and a lot of knowledge so
you have to really have something
something very special if you are in an
existing category
um you'll probably also want to think
about
is AI just a building block like maybe a
database technology or something else
which is okay or is it really something
which you think will make your product
much more valuable and more defensible
in the long run
um if you think that's the case then
expect to be asked about like your
unique differentiation and like what is
your what is the feedback loop what is
it that allows you to sustainably have
better model performance than others
um last lastly
um I think this is probably the first
time for many SAS companies to have
significant corks
um usually
infrastructure has become very cheap
with AWS and other Cloud providers
um so usually it's not something that
you have to think about a lot
um but now if you're using open AI
especially if you use some of the latest
models you might have significant costs
for those apis and so you'll have to
think about what that means for your
margins margin structure and is that
like what does it mean for your pricing
is that something that you can charge
extra for
that is all I prepared thank you so much
for your attention and I'm happy to take
questions or discuss later
[Applause]